# High Level Frameworks and Sector Plans

The Municipality has several high-level frameworks and sector plans that must be read in conjunction with the Fourth Generation IDP. These are frameworks and plans that are required in terms of legislation. The table below provides an overview of these frameworks and plans and the status thereof.



<table data-card-size="large" data-view="cards"><thead><tr><th>FRAMEWORK / SECTOR PLAN</th><th>STATUS</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td>Spatial Development Framework (SDF) (2013).</td><td>Approved by the Municipal Council on 26 February 2019. To be reviewed in 5 years’ time (2024)</td></tr><tr><td>Revised Disaster Management Plan (DMP) and Risk Preparedness Plans (Contingency Plans)</td><td>Approved by Municipal Council in May 2016 and revised in 2019/20.</td></tr><tr><td>Human Settlements Pipeline (HSP)</td><td>Approved by the Municipal Council in 2021.</td></tr><tr><td>Water Services Development Plan (WSDP)</td><td>A revised WSDP has been developed and approved for the years 2017 – 2022. A Water Service Audit must be approved before the end of October each year by the Mayoral Committee.</td></tr><tr><td>Integrated Waste Management Plan (IWMP)</td><td>Approved by Council on 18 October 2011 i.t.o. NEMA:WA. A 4 th Generation IWMP was approved 30 July 2019. Audit Report was approved 25 January 2022.</td></tr><tr><td>Bergrivier Municipal Second-Generation Coastal Management Programme, 2019-2024</td><td>Adopted by Council in November 2019</td></tr><tr><td>Integrated Transport Plan. (ITP)</td><td>Approved by Council 2019 - 2024.</td></tr><tr><td>Municipal Infrastructure Plan (MIP)</td><td><p>Completed, but a process to update masterplans will commence in</p><p>2023</p></td></tr><tr><td>Groot Berg River Estuary Draft Estuarine Management Plan</td><td><p>Draft, August 2021. The National Estuarine Management Protocol identifies Cape Nature as the Responsible Management Authority responsible for the development of the Groot Berg River Estuarine</p><p>Management Plan as well as being responsible for the co- ordination of its implementation. Client: Western Cape</p><p>Government, Department of Environmental Affairs &#x26; Development Planning</p></td></tr><tr><td>Community and Rural Safety Plan (CRSP)</td><td>Approved on 30 March 2021.</td></tr><tr><td>Integrated Second Generation of the West Coast district Municipality inclusive of the five Local Municipalities Air Quality Management Plan, (2019-2024</td><td>Adopted by Council in November 2019</td></tr><tr><td>Strategic Risk Register (RR).</td><td>Approved by the Municipal Council annually</td></tr><tr><td>Information Communication Technology Plan &#x26; Strategy)</td><td>Reviewed by Council 14 June 2021</td></tr><tr><td>Employment Equity Plan (EE)</td><td>Plan covers a 5-year period- 1 December – 30 September 2024</td></tr><tr><td>Workplace Skills Plan (WSP)</td><td>Reviewed annually (stay the same)</td></tr><tr><td>LED Strategy</td><td>Approved by the Municipal Council in 2021</td></tr><tr><td>Bergrivier Municipality Biodiversity Report</td><td>Approved by the Municipal Council in 2010.</td></tr><tr><td>Local Biodiversity Strategic And Action Plan (LBSAP)</td><td>Approved by the Municipal Council .</td></tr><tr><td>Climate Change Adaption Plan (CCAP)</td><td>Approved by the Municipal Council in March 2014.</td></tr><tr><td>The Bergrivier Municipality: Invasive species monitoring, control and eradication plan, dated June 2020</td><td>Approved and adopted by Mayco on 11 June 2020.</td></tr></tbody></table>

In addition to the above, the Municipality has several master plans and operations and maintenance plans (Standard Operating Procedures).

The following is a short description of each sector and/or framework. Each sector plan is available on request:
